---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Reflections on Javascript 1
date: 2017-01-18
labels:
  - JavaScript
---

## How JavaScript Found Me
It's probably been about six or seven years since I last wrote in Javascript regularly. Earlier in my life I worked for Oceanic Time Warner cable where I worked as a software engineer for them. My job was to program and build all of their interactive TV channels and all of them were written in a combination of HTML and JavaScript.

I wasn't always familiar with JavaScript of course. When I first started at Oceanic I was a complete greenhorn and completely out of my depth. Through a lucky break and knowing the right people I landed an internship opportunity right out of high school at not even eighteen years old. In high school I took a few A+ courses and bumbled my way through basic hardware and networking classes so when I signed on to Oceanic I explained my background was mostly limited to an L1 IT. The department I was assigned to in the machine was effectively brand new and already had a primary IT leaving me in a weird purgatory of on staff but superfluous. Instead, on my first day on the job after the initial interview, my supervisor asked me to see him and gave me the talk that effetively started me down my computer science path. They didn't need an IT. What they did need however was a programmer. Because the market saturation for Oceanic in Hawaii is so high compared to other states, Oceanic was used as a testbed for many new and cutting-edge cable TV services. One of these new services were interative channels. On-demand TV that you could control seemed pretty cool however they had only one other person building and developing their whole interative channel network. This was the day I was given a JavaScript reference book and flatly told "learn this".

## Relearning the Proper Way
Since my knowledge of JavaScript was completely self-taught, learning proper styling and ways to do things was my biggest learning curve. Particularly I've always used var to initialize and label everything. Learning how to use let and const to initialize variables was a learning curve especially when I have var just baked in to me. Compared to other languages where you need to initialize variable with their datatype JavaScript was incredibly easy and forgiving. Despite being somewhat forgiving and easy, I think that JavaScript is an incredibly powerful language especially for browser and html conection. Particularly, I think JSON is an incredibly easy to manage and powerful took that is available to JavaScript taking a lot of the headroom off of debugging and putting more effort into development. Although I admittedly am somewhat biased, I think JavaScript is the first language that any budding programmer should learn

## Atheltic Software Engineering
The athletic software engineering idea is absolutely fantastic to learn how to code in my opinion. Being able to do little things every day consistently is exactly how I learned JavaScript to begin with. Many times when learning a new language completely from scratch it's hard to grasp and keep motivation for two specific reasons. One is lack of direction. When presented with everything all at once it's hard to see how the peices fit together. It's like seeing a thousand piece puzzle you need to put together without knowing the picture that you're making. By having a small goal every day that only takes a few minutes you learn from the bottom up what each function does or how to do something that can be used in a larger project. The second problem is lack of motivation. Without proper motivation it's so easy to just drop it and give up. For some the challenge of having to do something every day is daunting but as long as it remains reasonable and easy to accomplish it's great motivation because at the end of it all there's tangible evidence of improvement which does wonders for motivation. I think this style of learning will suit me perfectly. I grew up with games both digital and tabletop so the idea of having small goals resonantes with "quests" in those games. For me, it's like playing a game with the bonus of learning something incredibly useful!
